README.md, before:

# Speech_to_speech_TeamA
# AI-Powered Real-Time Speech Translation

**Project Goal:** This project aims to develop a real-time, speech-to-speech translation system. It will convert live spoken content (from English/Hindi) into 12+ languages, making content on OTT platforms more accessible to a multilingual audience.

**Document Purpose:** This README tracks the technical progress of the project, detailing the setup steps, API usage, and I/O for each completed milestone.

---

## Milestone 1: Speech Recognition & Data Collection

This milestone involved setting up the Azure Speech-to-Text service. This was achieved through two features: transcribing a batch of pre-recorded audio files and transcribing live audio from a microphone.

### Setup Steps

1.  **Local Environment:** Installed Python 3.9+, pip, and `ffmpeg` (for audio conversion).
2.  **Folder Structure:** Created the main project folders: `/speech_samples`, `/scripts`, and `/transcripts`.
3.  **Azure SDK:** Installed the Azure Speech SDK for Python using the command:
    `pip install azure-cognitiveservices-speech`

### API Details

* **Service:** Azure Cognitive Services - **Speech Service**
* **Authentication:** Used a **Speech Key** and **Service Region** (e.g., `centralindia`) from the Azure portal.
* **SDK:** `azure.cognitiveservices.speech` (Python)
* **Key Functions:**
    * `speechsdk.AudioConfig(filename=...)` was used for *file-based* transcription.
    * `speechsdk.AudioConfig(use_default_microphone=True)` was used for *live* transcription.
* **Language Specificity:** The `language="hi-IN"` parameter was set in the recognizer to correctly transcribe Hindi.

### Feature 1: Batch Transcription from Files

This feature uses the `transcribe_files.py` script to process all audio files from the `/speech_samples` folder.

* **Input:** 10 standardized audio files (`.wav` format) placed in the `/speech_samples` folder.
    * `en_1audio.wav`
    * `hi_1audio.wav`
* **Output:** A single `transcripts.csv` file created in the `/transcripts` folder.
    ```csv
    filename,language,transcript
    en_1audio.wav,en,Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...
    hi_1audio.wav,hi,आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है और तापमान सामान्य रहेगा...
    ```

### Feature 2: Live Transcription from Microphone

This feature uses the `recognize_once.py` script to capture and transcribe speech directly from the user's microphone.

* **Input:** Live speech spoken into the default microphone after running the script.
* **Output (Live Terminal Session):** The script interactively records and prints the live transcript.
    ```bash
    PS C:\...> python scripts\recognize_once.py
    VOICE RECORDER WITH AUTO-STOP
    Say 'end recording' to stop, or press Ctrl+C manually.

    Recording started... Speak now!
    Hello.
    End recording.

    Stop command detected!
    Recording stopped

    FINAL TRANSCRIPTION SAVED!
    Saved to: ...\transcripts\recognized_output.csv

    TRANSCRIPT:
    Hello.
    ```
* **Output (Saved File):** The live transcript is saved to its own file (`recognized_output.csv`).

---

## Milestone 2: Translation Module & STT Integration

This milestone involved creating a "Translation Module" and integrating it with the **file-based STT output** (`transcripts.csv`) from Milestone 1.

### Setup Steps

1.  **Azure Resource:** Created a new **Azure Translator** resource in the Azure portal.
2.  **Configuration:** Set the pricing tier to **F0 (Free)** and the region to `centralindia` to match the Speech service.
3.  **Library:** Installed the `requests` library to communicate with the Translator's REST API:
    `pip install requests`
4.  **Integration:** Wrote a new script (`translate_text.py`) to automatically read the `transcripts.csv` from Milestone 1 and pass its contents to the new translation module.

### API Details

* **Service:** Azure AI - **Translator** (REST API)
* **Endpoint:** `https://api.cognitive.microsofttranslator.com/`
* **API Version:** 3.0
* **Authentication:** Used HTTP headers for the **Translator Key** (`Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Key`) and **Region** (`Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Region`).
* **Method:** Sent `POST` requests to the `/translate` endpoint with a JSON body containing the text to be translated.

### Sample Input / Output

* **Input:** The `transcripts.csv` file generated by Milestone 1. The script reads each row of this file.
    ```csv
    filename,language,transcript
    en_1audio.wav,en,Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...
    hi_1audio.wav,hi,आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है...
    ```

* **Output:** A live print to the terminal for each row processed from the CSV file.
    ```bash
    ==================================================
    Original Text (en): Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...

    Translated Outputs:
       HI: भारतीय क्रिकेट विराट कोहली के लिए ऐतिहासिक पल...
       FR: Moment historique for le cricket indien Virat Kohli...
       ES: Momento histórico para el cricket indio Virat Kohli...
       DE: Historischer Moment für das indische Cricket Virat Kohli...
    ==================================================
    
    ==================================================
    Original Text (hi): आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है...

    Translated Outputs:
       EN: Today the weather is clear...
       FR: Aujourd'hui, le temps est clair...
       ES: Hoy el tiempo está despejado...
       DE: Heute ist das Wetter klar...
    ==================================================
    ```
    ```

Commit message:

Revised README for clarity on features and setup
Updated the README to clarify features and improve descriptions for speech recognition milestones.

README.md, after:

# Speech_to_speech_TeamA
# AI-Powered Real-Time Speech Translation

**Project Goal:** This project aims to develop a real-time, speech-to-speech translation system. It will convert live spoken content (from English/Hindi) into 12+ languages, making content on OTT platforms more accessible to a multilingual audience.

**Document Purpose:** This README tracks the technical progress of the project, detailing the setup steps, API usage, and I/O for each completed milestone.

---

## Milestone 1: Speech Recognition & Data Collection

This milestone involved setting up the Azure Speech-to-Text service to transcribe a batch of pre-recorded audio files. Several additional features were also developed to enhance the project.

### Setup Steps

1.  **Local Environment:** Installed Python 3.9+, pip, and `ffmpeg` (for audio conversion).
2.  **Folder Structure:** Created the main project folders: `/speech_samples`, `/scripts`, and `/transcripts`.
3.  **Azure SDK:** Installed the Azure Speech SDK for Python using the command:
    `pip install azure-cognitiveservices-speech`

### API Details

* **Service:** Azure Cognitive Services - **Speech Service**
* **Authentication:** Used a **Speech Key** and **Service Region** (e.g., `centralindia`) from the Azure portal.
* **SDK:** `azure.cognitiveservices.speech` (Python)
* **Key Functions:**
    * `speechsdk.AudioConfig(filename=...)` was used for *file-based* transcription.
    * `speechsdk.AudioConfig(use_default_microphone=True)` was used for *live* transcription.
* **Language Specificity:** The `language="hi-IN"` parameter was set in the recognizer to correctly transcribe Hindi.

### Batch Transcription from Files

This feature uses the `transcribe_files.py` script to process all audio files from the `/speech_samples` folder.

* **Input:** 10 standardized audio files (`.wav` format) placed in the `/speech_samples` folder.
    * `en_1audio.wav`
    * `hi_1audio.wav`
* **Output:** A single `transcripts.csv` file created in the `/transcripts` folder.
    ```csv
    filename,language,transcript
    en_1audio.wav,en,Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...
    hi_1audio.wav,hi,आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है और तापमान सामान्य रहेगा...
    ```

### Additional Features

In addition to the core task, two extra features were implemented to improve the project's functionality:

1.  **Live Microphone Transcription:** A second script (`recognize_once.py`) was developed to capture and transcribe speech directly from the user's microphone in real-time. The script detects speech, stops on silence or a voice command, and saves the result.

    * **Sample Input:** Live speech spoken into the default microphone after running the script.
    * **Sample Output (Live Terminal Session):**
        ```bash
        PS C:\...> python scripts\recognize_once.py
        VOICE RECORDER WITH AUTO-STOP
        Say 'end recording' to stop, or press Ctrl+C manually.

        Recording started... Speak now!
        Hello.
        End recording.

        Stop command detected!
        Recording stopped

        FINAL TRANSCRIPTION SAVED!
        Saved to: ...\transcripts\recognized_output.csv

        TRANSCRIPT:
        Hello.
        ```

2.  **Automated Audio Conversion (in-code):** The main `transcribe_files.py` script was enhanced to automatically detect and convert any non-WAV audio file (like MP3, M4A, etc.) using `ffmpeg`. This creates a more robust pipeline where any audio format can be processed without manual conversion.

---

## Milestone 2: Translation Module & STT Integration

This milestone involved creating a "Translation Module" and integrating it with the **file-based STT output** (`transcripts.csv`) from Milestone 1.

### Setup Steps

1.  **Azure Resource:** Created a new **Azure Translator** resource in the Azure portal.
2.  **Configuration:** Set the pricing tier to **F0 (Free)** and the region to `centralindia` to match the Speech service.
3.  **Library:** Installed the `requests` library to communicate with the Translator's REST API:
    `pip install requests`
4.  **Integration:** Wrote a new script (`translate_text.py`) to automatically read the `transcripts.csv` from Milestone 1 and pass its contents to the new translation module.

### API Details

* **Service:** Azure AI - **Translator** (REST API)
* **Endpoint:** `https://api.cognitive.microsofttranslator.com/`
* **API Version:** 3.0
* **Authentication:** Used HTTP headers for the **Translator Key** (`Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Key`) and **Region** (`Ocp-Apim-Subscription-Region`).
* **Method:** Sent `POST` requests to the `/translate` endpoint with a JSON body containing the text to be translated.

### Sample Input / Output

* **Input:** The `transcripts.csv` file generated by Milestone 1. The script reads each row of this file.
    ```csv
    filename,language,transcript
    en_1audio.wav,en,Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...
    hi_1audio.wav,hi,आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है...
    ```

* **Output:** A live print to the terminal for each row processed from the CSV file.
    ```bash
    ==================================================
    Original Text (en): Historic moment for Indian cricket Virat Kohli...

    Translated Outputs:
       HI: भारतीय क्रिकेट विराट कोहली के लिए ऐतिहासिक पल...
       FR: Moment historique for le cricket indien Virat Kohli...
       ES: Momento histórico para el cricket indio Virat Kohli...
       DE: Historischer Moment für das indische Cricket Virat Kohli...
    ==================================================
    
    ==================================================
    Original Text (hi): आज मौसम साफ बना हुआ है...

    Translated Outputs:
       EN: Today the weather is clear...
       FR: Aujourd'hui, le temps est clair...
       ES: Hoy el tiempo está despejado...
       DE: Heute ist das Wetter klar...
    ==================================================
    ```
